WASHINGTON — Senate Democratic leaders are preparing legislation to expressly authorize the United States military to train foreign troops for the battle against the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, a move that will give lawmakers a chance to weigh in on the looming military action before the midterm elections.

Although the ground forces being trained would not be American, the trainers would be a “boots on the ground” prospect that might not sit well with members of both parties. No money would be attached to the measure, but a request for around $500 million might come later this fall, Senate Democratic aides said.

Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the majority leader, embraced the proposal on Wednesday, even as he expressed strong opposition to deploying American ground troops.

“It’s clear to me that we need to train and equip Syrian rebels and other groups in the Middle East that need some help,” Mr. Reid said. “The president has tried to get that from us, and we should give it to them.”

In a prime-time address on Wednesday evening, Mr. Obama is to explain to Americans his strategy for “degrading and ultimately destroying the terrorist group,” the White House said in a statement. People briefed on the president’s plans described a long-term campaign far more complex than the targeted strikes the United States has used against Al Qaeda in Yemen, Pakistan and elsewhere.

Mr. Obama is also prepared to authorize airstrikes in Syria, a senior administration official said on Tuesday, taking the military campaign against ISIS into new and unpredictable terrain. The president is still wrestling with a series of challenges, including how to intervene without aiding President Bashar al-Assad, and how to enlist potentially reluctant partners like Turkey and Saudi Arabia.

Ahead of the president’s speech to the nation Wednesday night, the prospect of expanding the war on ISIS — also known as ISIL — has already become political fodder. Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican leader, took to the Senate floor to denounce what he called Mr. Obama’s weak and failed foreign policy, but he will be hard-pressed to oppose the pending vote, which could come as soon as this week.

“The president has now declared that defeating ISIL is his objective,” he said. “That’s a good start. But Americans don’t want a lecture. They want a plan — a credible, comprehensive plan to deal with this menace that clearly wants to harm us here at home, and that is only becoming stronger by the day.”

Continue reading the main story
FEATURED COMMENT

pepperman33 Philadelphia, Pa.
Our actions only play into doing Iran and Syria's dirty work.
136 COMMENTS  WRITE A COMMENT
The White House quietly asked for the authority on Tuesday afternoon in a House stopgap spending bill that should receive a vote on Thursday, but Republican leaders did not include it. Jennifer Hing, a spokeswoman for the House Appropriations Committee, said that the request came just minutes before the spending bill was being officially introduced, and that it was seeking “a substantial and controversial change in U.S. foreign policy” that needed fuller consideration.

Continue reading the main storyContinue reading the main storyContinue reading the main story
Mr. Obama has resisted military engagement in Syria for more than three years, out of fear early on that arming the rebels who oppose Mr. Assad would fail to alter the balance in the civil war, while more direct military intervention could have spillover effects in the volatile region.

When he threatened Syria with a missile strike last year after Mr. Assad’s forces used chemical weapons, implacable opposition in Congress led him to shelve the plan. Now, however, the threat from ISIS has changed both the American political climate and his calculations.

On Tuesday, the president briefed Republican and Democratic leaders of the House and the Senate about his plans. Mr. Obama told them he believed he had the authority needed to order an expanded operation, though he would “welcome action by the Congress that would aid the overall effort,” the White House statement said.

Mr. Obama’s speech to the nation, on the eve of the 13th anniversary of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, is the culmination of weeks of anguished internal deliberations, followed by days of intense lobbying of allies by the president — at a NATO meeting in Wales, with Congress, and even over a three-hour dinner Monday night with members of the Democratic and Republican foreign policy establishment.

Continue reading the main story
RECENT COMMENTS

Leon Arie. A. 10 minutes ago
Support and train the Kurds.Deliver 100 Abrahams Tanks--- 300 APC's well Armoured --- all with anti Koronet missile defenses built in...
penna095 10 minutes ago
Give Republican war lovers John McCain and Lindsey Grahm rifles and pockets full of American tax dollars, and ship them off to Iraq to fight...
Patrick 10 minutes ago
The ISIS strategy is clear to me; they are former Iraqi's who went underground biding time during the Iraq war only to rise following our...
SEE ALL COMMENTS  WRITE A COMMENT
The White House has been galvanized by the beheadings of two American journalists, James Foley and Steven J. Sotloff, each by a masked ISIS fighter. The harrowing images, captured on video and circulated around the world, have turned American public opinion in favor of military action against the militants, recent polls show, and appear to have moved a president who had long resisted military engagement in Syria. And the United States has conducted airstrikes against ISIS in Iraq.

But Mr. Obama is facing complications as he works to assemble support at home and a coalition abroad. The Turkish government, for example, has been fearful of an aggressive retaliation against ISIS because of concerns that the group would harm the 49 Turkish citizens it is holding, including its consul general, after ISIS raided the Turkish Consulate in the Iraqi city of Mosul.

The White House sent Secretary of State John Kerry to Iraq on Wednesday for top-level talks to forge a coalition against the Sunni militants who have seized control of much of northern and western Iraq and to show support for Iraq’s new government. He will travel to Saudi Arabia this week to enlist the Saudis, who have been a vital source of funding to groups opposing the Assad government. Saudi Arabia, while supportive of the United States, worries that going to war with ISIS could provoke a backlash among Sunni extremists in its own population.

Mr. McConnell said he favored congressional approval of military action. But, he added, it is up to the president to present Congress with a clear plan to defeat ISIS before any authorization vote should be taken.

CONTINUE READING THE MAIN STORY
136
COMMENTS
A spokesman for Speaker John A. Boehner said he would support the deployment of American military forces “to help train and play an advisory role for the Iraqi security forces and assist with lethal targeting” of ISIS leaders. But he made no mention of a House vote.

On Wednesday, before the speech, the White House was to send a delegation to meet with senators in a classified briefing. Among those scheduled to go to the Capitol were the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Martin E. Dempsey; the director of the National Counterterrorism Center, Matthew Olsen; and the deputy national security adviser, Antony J. Blinken.

The brewing confrontation is already proving to be a dividing line between the interventionist wing of the Republican Party and a resurgent isolationism.
